What are the signs and symptoms of brain aneurysm?
The headache associated with a leaking aneurysm is severe. Blood is very irritating to the brain and surrounding membranes and causes significant pain. Patients may describe the "worst headache of their life," and the health care practitioner needs to have an appreciation that a brain aneurysm may be the potential cause of this type of pain. The headache may be associated with nausea, vomiting, and change in vision. A subarachnoid hemorrhage also causes pain and stiffness of the neck because the meninges become inflamed. However, the "worst headache of their life" complaint needs to be matched with physical findings to be considered a risk factor for a leaking aneurysm.

A concussion is a traumatic brain injury. See Answer

What is a brain aneurysm and what causes a brain aneurysm?
The Circle of Willis is the junction of the four major arteries, two carotid arteries and two vertebral arteries, that supply the brain with nutrition (especially oxygen and glucose). This loop of arteries is located at the base of the brain and sends out smaller branch arteries to all parts of the brain. The junctions where these arteries come together may develop weak spots. These weak spots can balloon out and fill with blood, creating the outpouchings of blood vessels known as aneurysms. These sac-like areas may leak or rupture, spilling blood into surrounding brain tissue.

Aneurysms have a variety of causes including high blood pressure and atherosclerosis, trauma, heredity, and abnormal blood flow at the junction where arteries come together.

There are other rare causes of aneurysms. Mycotic aneurysms are caused by infections of the artery wall. Tumors and trauma can also cause aneurysms to form. Drug abuse, especially cocaine, can cause the artery walls to inflame and weaken.

Brain aneurysms are a common occurrence. At autopsy, incidental aneurysms that have never caused any symptoms or issues are found in more than 1% of people. Most aneurysms remain small and are never diagnosed. Some, however, may gradually become larger and exert pressure on surrounding brain tissue and nerves and may be diagnosed because of stroke-like symptoms including:

numbness, or weakness of one side of the face,
a dilated pupil, or
change in vision.
The greater concern is a brain aneurysm that leaks or ruptures, and potentially causes stroke or death. Blood may leak into one of the membranes (meninges) that covers the brain and spinal canal and is known as a subarachnoid hemorrhage (sub= beneath + arachnoid=one of the brain coverings + hemorrhage=bleeding).

How is brain aneurysm diagnosed?
The diagnosis of brain aneurysm begins with a high index of suspicion by the health care practitioner. The history of the headache, an acute onset of the headache, associated with a stiff neck and an ill-appearing patient on physical examination, typically lead the health care practitioner to consider the diagnosis and order a CT (computerized tomography) scan of the head. If the CT scan is performed within 72 hours of the onset of the headache, it will detect 93% to 100% of all aneurysms. In the few cases that are not recognized by CT, the health care practitioner may consider performing a lumbar puncture (LP, or spinal tap) to identify blood in the cerebrospinal fluid that runs in the subarachnoid space. Some hospitals will consider CT angiography of the brain instead of the LP.

If the CT or the LP reveals the presence of blood, angiography is performed to identify where the aneurysm is located and to plan treatment. Angiography, where a catheter is threaded into the arteries of the brain and dye is injected while pictures are taken, can demonstrate the anatomy of the arteries and uncover the presence and location of an aneurysm. CT angiography or MR angiography may be performed without threading catheters into the brain as is the case with a formal angiogram. There is some controversy as to which type of angiogram is best to assess the patient, and the kind chosen depends upon the patient's situation and condition.

Though the symptoms may suggest a brain aneurysm, other diagnoses may need to be considered. Migraine headache, meningitis, tumor, and stroke all may cause neurologic symptoms. Based on the patient's presentation, the health care practitioner will need to decide which tests and studies to use in addition to brain imaging to establish the correct diagnosis.

Concussions & Brain Injuries: Symptoms, Tests, Treatment See Slideshow

What is the treatment for brain aneurysm?
Treatment for a symptomatic aneurysm is to repair the blood vessels. Clipping and coiling are two treatment options.

Clipping: A neurosurgeon can operate on the brain by cutting open the skull, identifying the damaged blood vessel and putting a clip across the aneurysm. This prevents blood from entering the aneurysm and causing further growth or blood leakage.
Coiling: An interventional neurologist, neurosurgeon, or interventional radiologist can thread a tube through the arteries, as with an angiogram, identify the aneurysm, and fill it with coils of platinum wire or with latex. This prevents further blood from entering the aneurysm and resolves the problem.
Both these options have the risk of damaging the blood vessel and causing more bleeding, damaging nearby brain tissue, and causing the surrounding blood vessels to go into spasm; depriving brain tissue of blood supply and causing a stroke.

Prior, during, and after surgery, attention is paid to protect the brain and its blood vessels from potential further damage. Vitals signs are monitored frequently, and heart monitors are used to watch for abnormal heart rhythms. Medications may be used to control high blood pressure and prevent blood vessel spasm, seizure, agitation, and pain.

What is the outcome of brain aneurysm?
Brain aneurysms are deadly. About 10% of patients with a ruptured aneurysm die before receiving medical care. If untreated, another 50% will die within a month, with a 20% risk of rebleed by the end of the first two weeks. Aside from the bleeding issues, there is significant risk of artery spasm leading to stroke.

Survival rates are increased in patients who present early to the hospital. Early diagnosis, aneursym repair, and control of blood vessel spasms with appropriate medications are all associated with increased survival.


What are future directions for the treatment of brain aneurysm?
For those who survive an initial aneurysm rupture, blood vessel spasm (vasospasm) may be the villain in causing continued brain damage. Experiments to develop new drugs to control vasospasm are ongoing. Molecules that can cause spasm are being identified, and antibodies may be able to be produced to blunt their effect.

Studies are also looking at the possibility that brain aneurysms may be hereditary, and perhaps screening of high-risk populations may be possible in the future.

An aneurysm occurs when an artery’s wall weakens and causes an abnormally large bulge. This bulge can rupture and cause internal bleeding. Although an aneurysm can occur in any part of your body, they’re most common in the:

brain
aorta
legs
spleen
About 13,000 deaths occur each year in the United States from aortic aneurysms.

Although the exact cause of an aneurysm is unclear, certain factors contribute to the condition.

For example, damaged tissue in the arteries can play a role. The arteries can be harmed by blockages, such as fatty deposits. These deposits can trigger the heart to pump harder than necessary to push blood past the fatty buildup. This stress can damage the arteries because of the increased pressure.

Atherosclerotic disease
Atherosclerotic disease can also lead to an aneurysm. People with atherosclerotic disease have a form of plaque buildup in their arteries. Plaque is a hard substance that damages the arteries and prevents blood from flowing freely.

High blood pressure
High blood pressure may also cause an aneurysm. The force of your blood as it travels through your blood vessels is measured by how much pressure it places on your artery walls. If the pressure increases above a normal rate, it may enlarge or weaken the blood vessels.

Blood pressure for an adult is considered normal at or below 120/80 mm Hg, or millimeters of mercury.

A significantly higher blood pressure can increase the risk for heart, blood vessel, and circulation problems. Higher-than-normal blood pressure doesn’t necessarily put you at risk for an aneurysm.

An aneurysm may occur anywhere in your body, but these are the most common locations of aneurysms:

Aorta
The aorta is the largest blood vessel in the body. It begins at the left ventricle of the heart and travels down the abdomen where it splits off into both legs. The aorta is a common site for arterial aneurysms.

Aneurysms in the chest cavity are called thoracic aortic aneurysms.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms are the most common type. In rare cases, both the chest and abdomen can be affected by arterial damage.
Brain
Aneurysms in the brain can be any size. These often form in the blood vessels that lie deep within the brain. They also may not present any symptoms or signs. You may not even know you have an aneurysm. Brain aneurysms of this type may cause bleeding in as many as 3 percent of people.

Other areas
You can also have an aneurysm in the artery behind your knee, in your spleen, or in your intestines.

Symptoms of an aneurysm vary with each type and location. It’s important to know that aneurysms that occur in the body or brain generally don’t present signs or symptoms until they rupture.

Aneurysms that occur near the surface of the body may show signs of swelling and pain. A large mass may also develop. The symptoms of ruptured aneurysms anywhere in the body can include:

bleeding
increased heart rate
pain
feeling dizzy or lightheaded
Serious complications from aneurysms can cause death if you don’t get emergency care.

The type of aneurysm that can affect you depends on specific risk factors. Males are more likely to have aneurysms than females. People older than 60 are also at a higher risk. Other factors may include:

a family history of heart conditions, including heart disease and heart attack
smoking
obesity
pregnancy, which may increase your risk of having an aneurysm of the spleen
The diagnostic tools used to find arterial damage often depend on the location of the problem. Your doctor may refer you to a specialist like a cardiothoracic or vascular surgeon.

CT scans and ultrasound methods are common tools used to diagnose or find blood vessel irregularities. CT scans use X-rays to examine the inside of your body. This allows your doctor to see the condition of the blood vessels, as well as any blockages, bulges, and weak spots that may be inside the blood vessels.

Treatment typically depends on the location and type of aneurysm.

For example, a weak area of a vessel in your chest and abdomen may require a type of surgery called an endovascular stent graft. This minimally invasive procedure may be chosen over traditional open surgery because it involves repairing and reinforcing damaged blood vessels. The procedure also reduces the chance of infection, scarring, and other problems.

Other treatments can include medications that treat high blood pressure and high cholesterol. Certain types of beta-blockers may also be prescribed to lower blood pressure. Lowering your blood pressure may keep your aneurysm from rupturing.

Eating a healthy diet containing plenty of fruits, whole grains, and vegetables may help prevent an aneurysm from forming. Meat and poultry low in saturated fat and cholesterol are also good options for protein. Low-fat dairy products are also beneficial.

Regular exercise, especially cardio, can encourage healthy blood circulation and blood flow through the heart, arteries, and other blood vessels.

If you smoke tobacco products, now is the time to quit. Eliminating tobacco can decrease your risk for an aneurysm.

You should also see your doctor for annual checkups.

Think of a weak spot in a balloon and how it feels stretched out and thin. A brain aneurysm is like that. It’s a weak spot in the wall of a blood vessel inside the brain.

That area of the blood vessel gets worn out from constant flow of blood and bulges out, almost like a bubble. It can grow to the size of a small berry.

Although brain aneurysms sound alarming, most don’t cause symptoms or health problems. You can enjoy a long life without ever realizing that you have a brain aneurysm.

But in rare cases, aneurysms can grow big, leak, or explode. Bleeding in the brain, known as hemorrhagic stroke, is very serious and requires urgent medical care.

A ruptured brain aneurysm can be life-threatening and lead to:

cerebral vasospasm (reduced blood flow to the brain)
hydrocephalus (too much spinal fluid in the brain)
coma
permanent brain damage
Symptoms
Get emergency care if you suddenly get an intensely painful headache, lose consciousness, or have some of these other symptoms of an aneurysm rupture:

Nausea and vomiting
Drowsiness
Loss of balance such as walking and normal coordination
Stiff neck
Dilated pupils
Sensitivity to light
Sudden blurred or double vision
Drooping eyelid
Confusion or trouble with mental awareness
Seizure
Although brain aneurysms usually don’t show symptoms, they can press on the brain and nerves as they get bigger. See a doctor at once if you’re having the following symptoms of an unruptured aneurysm:

Headache
Dilated pupils
Blurred or double vision
Pain above and behind an eye
Drooping eyelid
Hard time speaking
Weakness and numbness in one side of your face
Causes
Brain aneurysms usually develop as people age, becoming more common after 40. It’s also possible to have a blood vessel defect at birth.

Women tend to have higher rates of aneurysms than men.

Aneurysms tend to form at the fork of blood vessels, places where they branch off, because those sections tend to be weaker. They are most commonly found in the base of the brain.

What Raises My Chances of Having One?
Several things, including your medical history and lifestyle, can increase your odds of a brain aneurysm.

That includes atherosclerosis, a disease in which fat builds up inside the wall of your arteries (blood vessels that deliver oxygen-rich blood throughout your body). Other things that can come into play:

Diseases affecting your blood or blood vessels
High blood pressure
Injury or trauma to your head
Infection
Cancer or tumors in head and neck
Abnormalities at birth, such as tangled blood vessels in your brain
Family history of brain aneurysms
Alcohol consumption, especially binge drinking
Smoking
Drug abuse such as cocaine or amphetamines (stimulant drugs)
Diagnosis
Several types of scans and tests can be used to figure out whether you have a brain aneurysm. They include:

CT scan: This exam creates images of your brain. You will lie on a table that slides into a CT scanner. A technician will inject contrast dye into one of your veins to make it easier to see the blood flow and spot aneurysms in your brain.

MRI: This exam is similar in that you lie on a table that slides into a scanner. The MRI uses magnetic field and radio waves to create detailed images of your brain and blood vessels. MRIs and CT scans can detect aneurysms larger than 3 to 5 millimeters.

The following tests are more invasive than CT or MRI scans. But they could give you and your doctors with a more complete picture of what’s going on:

Angiogram: This test, considered the most reliable way to detect aneurysms, shows the weak spots in your blood vessels.

During the test, you lie on an X-ray table, and you will be given something to numb any pain.

Your doctor will insert a small flexible tube through a blood vessel in the leg. She will guide that tube, called a catheter, into the blood vessels in your neck that reach the brain.

She will inject a contrast dye into you, and X-rays will be taken that show all the blood vessels in the brain. This gives your doctor a map of your blood vessels, pinpointing the aneurysm.

Cerebrospinal fluid test: Your doctor may order this test if she suspects that an aneurysm may have ruptured.

You’ll be given something to block any pain. A technician will inject a needle into you to draw spinal fluid. That fluid is tested to see whether it contains blood, which could indicate that an aneurysm has ruptured.

Treatments for a Ruptured Aneurysm
You need treatment as soon as possible if you have a ruptured brain aneurysm, because it’s likely that it will bleed again. Treatment involves stopping the blood flow into the aneurysm.

The procedures carry risks. Your doctor will figure out which treatment works best based your health, and the size, type, and location of the aneurysm.

Surgical clipping: A section of your skull is removed to locate the aneurysm. A metal clip is placed on the opening of the aneurysm to cut off the blood flow. Your skull is then sealed shut.

Endovascular coiling: This doesn’t require surgery that opens the skull. Your doctor will insert a catheter into your groin to reach the affected blood vessel where the aneurysm is located.

She’ll send tiny platinum coils through the tube and place them inside the aneurysm. The coils conform to the shape of the aneurysm, stopping the blood flow there. This may be safer than surgical clipping, but it has a higher chance of the aneurysm bleeding again.

Flow diverter surgery: This option is for larger brain aneurysms in which neither clipping nor coiling would work. In this procedure, your doctor inserts a stent, usually a metal mesh, inside the artery. It becomes a wall inside the vessel to divert blood away from the aneurysm.

Treatments for an Aneurysm that Hasn’t Ruptured
Small aneurysms that haven’t ruptured and aren’t causing symptoms may not need treatment. But this depends on your health and the aneurysm. You talk this all over with your doctors.

If you are living with a brain aneurysm that has not ruptured, lifestyle changes can help lower your chances of having it leak or pop:

Don’t use cocaine or other stimulant drugs.
Stop smoking.
Lower your blood pressure with diet and exercise.
Limit your caffeine, because it can suddenly raise blood pressure.
Avoid lifting heavy things; this also can raise your blood pressure.

What is a cerebral aneurysm?
An aneurysm is a weak area in a blood vessel that usually enlarges. It’s often described as a “ballooning” of the blood vessel. Watch an animation.

How do aneurysms form? Are people born with an aneurysm?
People usually aren’t born with aneurysms. Most develop after age 40. Aneurysms usually develop at branching points of arteries and are caused by constant pressure from blood flow. They often enlarge slowly and become weaker as they grow, just as a balloon becomes weaker as it stretches. Aneurysms may be associated with other types of blood vessel disorders, such as fibromuscular dysplasia, cerebral arteritis or arterial dissection, but these are very unusual. Some aneurysms are due to infections, drugs such as amphetamines and cocaine, or direct brain trauma from an accident.

How is an aneurysm diagnosed?
Special imaging tests can detect a brain aneurysm. In the CTA (computed tomographic angiography), patients are placed on a table that slides into a CT scanner. A special contrast material (dye) is injected into a vein, and images are taken of the blood vessels to look for abnormalities such as an aneurysm. In the second test, called MRA (magnetic resonance angiography), patients are placed on a table that slides into a magnetic resonance scanner, and the blood vessels are imaged to detect a cerebral aneurysm.

The most reliable test is called a diagnostic cerebral angiogram. In this test, the patient lies on an X-ray table. A small tube (catheter) is inserted through a blood vessel in the leg (groin) and guided into each of the blood vessels in the neck that go to the brain. Contrast is then injected, and pictures are taken of all the blood vessels in the brain. This test is slightly more invasive and less comfortable.

Before any treatment is considered, a diagnostic cerebral angiogram is usually performed to fully map a plan for therapy.

If one aneurysm forms, will others form? Having one aneurysm means there’s about a 20 percent chance of having one or more other aneurysms.

What are the symptoms of an unruptured aneurysm? Smaller aneurysms usually don’t have symptoms. But as an aneurysm enlarges, it can produce headaches or localized pain. If an aneurysm gets very large, it may produce pressure on the normal brain tissue or adjacent nerves. This pressure can cause difficulty with vision, numbness or weakness of an arm or leg, difficulty with memory or speech, or seizures.

What causes an aneurysm to bleed?
We usually don’t know why an aneurysm bleeds or exactly when it will bleed. We do know what increases the chance for bleeding:

High blood pressure is the leading cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage. Heavy lifting or straining can cause pressure to rise in the brain and may lead to an aneurysm rupture.

Strong emotions, such as being upset or angry, can raise blood pressure and can subsequently cause aneurysms to rupture.

*Blood thinners (such as warfarin), some medications and prescription drugs (including diet pills that act as stimulants such as ephedrine and amphetamines), and harmful drugs like cocaine can cause aneurysms to rupture and bleed.

What are the chances that an unruptured aneurysm may bleed? Many factors determine whether an aneurysm is likely to bleed. These include the size, shape and location of the aneurysm and symptoms that it causes. Smaller aneurysms that are uniform in size may be less likely to bleed than larger, irregularly shaped ones. Once an aneurysm has bled, there’s a very high chance of re-bleeding.

What happens if an aneurysm bleeds? If an aneurysm ruptures, it leaks blood into the space around the brain. This is called a “subarachnoid hemorrhage.” Depending on the amount of blood, it can produce:

a sudden severe headache that can last from several hours to days
nausea and vomiting drowsiness and/or coma
The hemorrhage may also damage the brain directly, usually from bleeding into the brain itself. This is called a “hemorrhagic stroke.” This can lead to:

weakness or paralysis of an arm or leg
trouble speaking or understanding language
vision problems
seizures
What is the usual damage to the brain after an aneurysm bleeds?
Once an aneurysm bleeds, the chance of death is about 40 percent and the chance of some brain damage is about 66 percent, even if the aneurysm is treated. If the aneurysm isn’t treated quickly enough, another bleed may occur from the already ruptured aneurysm.

Vasospasm (irritation by the leaked blood causing narrowing of the blood vessels) is a common complication following a ruptured aneurysm. This can lead to further brain damage. Other problems may include hydrocephalus (enlargement of the spaces within the brain that produce cerebrospinal fluid), difficulty breathing that requires a mechanical ventilator, and infection.

Why is the damage so extensive after bleeding? After blood enters the brain and the space around it, direct damage to the brain tissue and brain function results. The amount of damage is usually related to the amount of blood. Damage is due to the increased pressure and swelling from bleeding directly into the brain tissue, or from local cellular damage to brain tissue from irritation of blood in the space between the brain and the skull.

Blood can also irritate and damage the normal blood vessels and cause vasospasm (constriction). This can interrupt normal blood flow to the healthy brain tissue and can cause even more brain damage. This is called an “ischemic stroke.”

Will treating a ruptured aneurysm reverse or improve brain damage? Once an aneurysm bleeds and brain damage occurs, treating the aneurysm will not reverse the damage. Treatment helps prevent more bleeding.

How is a treatment method for an aneurysm chosen? Doctors must evaluate the risk factors that favor treatment vs. non-treatment and decide which technique may be best. It’s important to consult with experts in this field. This should include a cerebrovascular neurosurgeon who specializes in surgically clipping aneurysms, a neurosurgeon with endovascular expertise and training, a neurointerventionalist (a neurologist with endovascular training) or a neuroradiologist who specializes in the less invasive treatment of cerebral aneurysms by coiling.

How should an aneurysm be treated?
The best treatment depends on many things, including whether the aneurysm has ruptured or not. A ruptured aneurysm usually requires treatment right away. However, the treatment time and options depend on the size, location and shape of the aneurysm, as well as the patient’s overall medical condition. If an aneurysm hasn’t ruptured, the treatment decision depends on its size, location and shape, and the patient’s symptoms

What treatments are available?
Medical therapy.  Small, unruptured aneurysms that aren’t creating any symptoms may not need treatment unless they grow, trigger symptoms or rupture. It’s very important to have annual check-ups to monitor blood pressure, cholesterol and other medical conditions.
Neurosurgery. Depending on a person’s risk factors, open surgery may be recommended. Patients are placed under general anesthesia, and the neurosurgeon places a surgical clip around the base of the aneurysm.
Neurointerventionalist/neuroradiologist. Depending on the aneurysm’s size, location and shape, it may be treatable from inside the blood vessel. This minimally invasive procedure is similar to the cerebral angiogram. However, in addition to taking pictures, a catheter is directed through the blood vessels into the aneurysm itself. Then, using X-ray guidance, the endovascular surgeon carefully places soft platinum micro-coils into the aneurysm and detaches them. The coils stay within the aneurysm and act as a mechanical barrier to blood flow, thus sealing it off
What are the potential complications of aneurysm treatment?
Until the aneurysm is safely and completely treated, there’s always the risk it may re-bleed and cause more brain damage. If normal blood vessels are damaged, it could also result in more brain damage.

What follow-up is required after aneurysm treatment? Depending on the type of treatment, the two follow-up procedures are:

Surgical clipping. After this type of surgery, a post-operative angiogram is usually performed during the hospital stay to make sure the surgical clip has completely treated the aneurysm.
Neurointerventionalist/neuroradiologist. After coiling an aneurysm, a routine follow-up angiogram is usually performed six to 12 months after the procedure to make sure the aneurysm remains blocked off

What is a cerebral aneurysm?
A cerebral aneurysm (also known as a brain aneurysm) is a weak or thin spot on an artery in the brain that balloons or bulges out and fills with blood. The bulging aneurysm can put pressure on the nerves or brain tissue. It may also burst or rupture, spilling blood into the surrounding tissue (called a hemorrhage). A ruptured aneurysm can cause serious health problems such as hemorrhagic stroke, brain damage, coma, and even death.

Some cerebral aneurysms, particularly those that are very small, do not bleed or cause other problems. These types of aneurysms are usually detected during imaging tests for other medical conditions. Cerebral aneurysms can occur anywhere in the brain, but most form in the major arteries along the base of the skull.

Brain aneurysms can occur in anyone and at any age. They are most common in adults between the ages of 30 and 60 and are more common in women than in men. People with certain inherited disorders are also at higher risk.

All cerebral aneurysms have the potential to rupture and cause bleeding within the brain or surrounding area. Approximately 30,000 Americans per year suffer a brain aneurysm rupture. Much less is known about how many people have cerebral aneurysms, since they don’t always cause symptoms. There are no proven statistics but a consensus of scientific papers indicate that between 3 and 5 percent of Americans may have an aneurysm in their lifetime.

top

What are the symptoms?
Unruptured aneurysm
Most cerebral aneurysms do not show symptoms until they either become very large or rupture. Small unchanging aneurysms generally will not produce symptoms.

A larger aneurysm that is steadily growing may press on tissues and nerves causing:

pain above and behind the eye
numbness
weakness
paralysis on one side of the face
a dilated pupil in the eye
vision changes or double vision.
Ruptured aneurysm
When an aneurysm ruptures (bursts), one always experiences a sudden and extremely severe headache (e.g., the worst headache of one’s life) and may also develop:

double vision
nausea
vomiting
stiff neck
sensitivity to light
seizures
loss of consciousness (this may happen briefly or may be prolonged)
cardiac arrest.
Leaking aneurysm
Sometimes an aneurysm may leak a small amount of blood into the brain (called a sentinel bleed). Sentinel or warning headaches may result from an aneurysm that suffers a tiny leak, days or weeks prior to a significant rupture. However, only a minority of individuals have a sentinel headache prior to rupture.

If you experience a sudden, severe headache, especially when it is combined with any other symptoms, you should seek immediate medical attention.

top

How are aneurysms classified?
Type
There are three types of cerebral aneurysms:

Saccular aneurysm. A saccular aneurysm is a rounded sac containing blood, that is attached to a main artery or one of its branches. Also known as a berry aneurysm (because it resembles a berry hanging from a vine), this is the most common form of cerebral aneurysm. It is typically found on arteries at the base of the brain. Saccular aneurysms occur most often in adults.
Fusiform aneurysm. A fusiform aneurysm balloons or bulges out on all sides of the artery.
Mycotic aneurysm. A mycotic aneurysm occurs as the result of an infection that can sometimes affect the arteries in the brain. The infection weakens the artery wall, causing a bulging aneurysm to form.
Size
Aneurysms are also classified by size: small, large, and giant.

Small aneurysms are less than 11 millimeters in diameter (about the size of a large pencil eraser).
Large aneurysms are 11 to 25 millimeters (about the width of a dime).
Giant aneurysms are greater than 25 millimeters in diameter (more than the width of a quarter).
top

What causes a cerebral aneurysm?
Cerebral aneurysms form when the walls of the arteries in the brain become thin and weaken. Aneurysms typically form at branch points in arteries because these sections are the weakest. Occasionally, cerebral aneurysms may be present from birth, usually resulting from an abnormality in an artery wall.

Risk factors for developing an aneurysm

Sometimes cerebral aneurysms are the result of inherited risk factors, including:

genetic connective tissue disorders that weaken artery walls
polycystic kidney disease (in which numerous cysts form in the kidneys)
arteriovenous malformations (snarled tangles of arteries and veins in the brain that disrupt blood flow. Some AVMs develop sporadically, or on their own.)
history of aneurysm in a first-degree family member (child, sibling, or parent).
Other risk factors develop over time and include:

untreated high blood pressure
cigarette smoking
drug abuse, especially cocaine or amphetamines, which raise blood pressure to dangerous levels. Intravenous drug abuse is a cause of infectious mycotic aneurysms.
age over 40.
Less common risk factors include:

head trauma
brain tumor
infection in the arterial wall (mycotic aneurysm).
Additionally, high blood pressure, cigarette smoking, diabetes, and high cholesterol puts one at risk of atherosclerosis (a blood vessel disease in which fats build up on the inside of artery walls), which can increase the risk of developing a fusiform aneurysm.

Risk factors for an aneurysm to rupture

Not all aneurysms will rupture. Aneurysm characteristics such as size, location, and growth during follow-up evaluation may affect the risk that an aneurysm will rupture. In addition, medical conditions may influence aneurysm rupture.

Risk factors include:

Smoking. Smoking is linked to both the development and rupture of cerebral aneurysms. Smoking may even cause multiple aneurysms to form in the brain.
High blood pressure. High blood pressure damages and weakens arteries, making them more likely to form and to rupture.
Size. The largest aneurysms are the ones most likely to rupture in a person who previously did not show symptoms.
Location. Aneurysms located on the posterior communicating arteries (a pair of arteries in the back part of the brain) and possibly those on the anterior communicating artery (a single artery in the front of the brain) have a higher risk of rupturing than those at other locations in the brain.
Growth. Aneurysms that grow, even if they are small, are at increased risk of rupture.
Family history. A family history of aneurysm rupture suggests a higher risk of rupture for aneurysms detected in family members.
The greatest risk occurs in individuals with multiple aneurysms who have already suffered a previous rupture or sentinel bleed.
top

How are cerebral aneurysms diagnosed?
Most cerebral aneurysms go unnoticed until they rupture or are detected during medical imaging tests for another condition.

If you have experienced a severe headache or have any other symptoms related to a ruptured aneurysm your doctor will order tests to determine if blood has leaked into the space between the skull bone and brain.

Several tests are available to diagnose brain aneurysms and determine the best treatment. These include:

Computed tomography (CT). This fast and painless scan is often the first test a physician will order to determine if blood has leaked into the brain. CT uses x-rays to create two-dimensional images, or “slices,” of the brain and skull. Occasionally a contrast dye is injected into the bloodstream prior to scanning to assess the arteries, and look for a possible aneurysm. This process, called CT angiography (CTA), produces sharper, more detailed images of blood flow in the brain arteries. CTA can show the size, location, and shape of an unruptured or a ruptured aneurysm.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). An MRI uses computer-generated radio waves and a magnetic field to create two- and three-dimensional detailed images of the brain and can determine if there has been bleeding into the brain. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) produces detailed images of the brain arteries and can show the size, location, and shape of an aneurysm.
Cerebral angiography. This imaging technique can find blockages in arteries in the brain or neck. It also can identify weak spots in an artery, like an aneurysm. The test is used to determine the cause of the bleeding in the brain and the exact location, size, and shape of an aneurysm. Your doctor will pass a catheter (long, flexible tube) typically from the groin arteries to inject a small amount of contrast dye into your neck and brain arteries. The contrast dye helps the X-ray create a detailed picture of the appearance of an aneurysm and a clear picture of any blockage in the arteries.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. This test measures the chemicals in the fluid that cushions and protects the brain and spinal cord (cerebrospinal fluid). Most often a doctor will collect the CSF by performing a spinal tap (lumbar puncture), in which a thin needle is inserted into the lower back (lumbar spine) and a small amount of fluid is removed and tested. The results will help detect any bleeding around the brain. If bleeding is detected, additional tests would be needed to identify the exact cause of the bleeding.
top

What are the complications of a ruptured cerebral aneurysm?
Aneurysms may rupture and bleed into the space between the skull and the brain (subarachnoid hemorrhage) and sometimes into the brain tissue (intracerebral hemorrhage). These are forms of stroke called hemorrhagic stroke. The bleeding into the brain can cause a wide spectrum of symptoms, from a mild headache to permanent damage to the brain, or even death.

After an aneurysm has ruptured it may cause serious complications such as:

Rebleeding. Once it has ruptured, an aneurysm may rupture again before it is treated, leading to further bleeding into the brain, and causing more damage or death.
Change in sodium level. Bleeding in the brain can disrupt the balance of sodium in the blood supply and cause swelling in brain cells. This can result in permanent brain damage.
Hydrocephalus. Subarachnoid hemorrhage can cause hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus is a buildup of too much cerebrospinal fluid in the brain, which causes pressure that can lead to permanent brain damage or death. Hydrocephalus occurs frequently after subarachnoid hemorrhage because the blood blocks the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid. If left untreated, increased pressure inside the head can cause coma or death.
Vasospasm. This occurs frequently after subarachnoid hemorrhage when the bleeding causes the arteries in the brain to contract and limit blood flow to vital areas of the brain. This can cause strokes from lack of adequate blood flow to parts of the brain.
Seizures. Aneurysm bleeding can cause seizures (convulsions), either at the time of bleed or in the immediate aftermath. While most seizures are evident, on occasion they may only be seen by sophisticated brain testing. Untreated seizures or those that do not respond to treatment can cause brain damage.

top

How are cerebral aneurysms treated?
Not all cerebral aneurysms require treatment. Some very small unruptured aneurysms that are not associated with any factors suggesting a higher risk of rupture may be safely left alone and monitored with MRA or CTA to detect any growth. It is important to aggressively treat any coexisting medical problems and risk factors.

Treatments for unruptured cerebral aneurysms that have not shown symptoms have some potentially serious complications and should be carefully weighed against the predicted rupture risk.

Treatment considerations for unruptured aneurysms
A doctor will consider a variety of factors when determining the best option for treating an unruptured aneurysm, including:

type, size, and location of the aneurysm
risk of rupture
the person’s age and health
personal and family medical history
risk of treatment.
Individuals should also take the following steps to reduce the risk of aneurysm rupture:

carefully control blood pressure
stop smoking
avoid cocaine use or other stimulant drugs.
Treatments for unruptured and ruptured cerebral aneurysms
Surgery, endovascular treatments, or other therapies are often recommended to manage symptoms and prevent damage from unruptured and ruptured aneurysms.

Surgery
There are a few surgical options available for treating cerebral aneurysms. These procedures carry some risk such as possible damage to other blood vessels, the potential for aneurysm recurrence and rebleeding, and a risk of stroke.

Microvascular clipping. This procedure involves cutting off the flow of blood to the aneurysm and requires open brain surgery. A doctor will locate the blood vessels that feed the aneurysm and place a tiny, metal, clothespin-like clip on the aneurysm’s neck to stop its blood supply. Clipping has been shown to be highly effective, depending on the location, size, and shape of the aneurysm. In general, aneurysms that are completely clipped do not recur.
Endovascular treatment

Platinum coil embolization. This procedure is a less invasive procedure than microvascular surgical clipping. A doctor will insert a hollow plastic tube (a catheter) into an artery, usually in the groin, and thread it through the body to the brain aneurysm. Using a wire, the doctor will pass detachable coils (tiny spirals of platinum wire) through the catheter and release them into the aneurysm. The coils block the aneurysm and reduce the flow of blood into the aneurysm. The procedure may need to be performed more than once during the person’s lifetime because aneurysms treated with coiling can sometimes recur.
Flow diversion devices. Other endovascular treatment options include placing a small stent (flexible mesh tube) similar to those placed for heart blockages, in the artery to reduce blood flow into the aneurysm. A doctor will insert a hollow plastic tube (a catheter) into an artery, usually in the groin, and thread it through the body to the artery on which the aneurysm is located. This procedure is used to treat very large aneurysms and those that cannot be treated with surgery or platinum coil embolization.
Other treatments
Other treatments for a ruptured cerebral aneurysm aim to control symptoms and reduce complications. These treatments include:

Antiseizure drugs (anticonvulsants). These drugs may be used to prevent seizures related to a ruptured aneurysm.
Calcium channel-blocking drugs. Risk of stroke by vasospasm can be reduced with calcium channel-blocking drugs.
. A shunt, which funnels cerebrospinal fluid from the brain to elsewhere in the body, may be surgically inserted into the brain following rupture if the buildup of cerebrospinal fluid (hydrocephalus) is causing harmful pressure on surrounding brain tissue.
Rehabilitative therapy. Individuals who have suffered a subarachnoid hemorrhage often need physical, speech, and occupational therapy to regain lost function and learn to cope with any permanent disability.

top

What is the prognosis?
An unruptured aneurysm may go unnoticed throughout a person’s lifetime and not cause symptoms.

After an aneurysm bursts, the person’s prognosis largely depends on:

age and general health
preexisting neurological conditions
location of the aneurysm
extent of bleeding (and rebleeding)
time between rupture and medical attention
successful treatment of the aneurysm.
About 25 percent of individuals whose cerebral aneurysm has ruptured do not survive the first 24 hours; another 25 percent die from complications within 6 months. People who experience subarachnoid hemorrhage may have permanent neurological damage. Other individuals recover with little or no disability. Diagnosing and treating a cerebral aneurysm as soon as possible will help increase the chances of making a full recovery.

Recovery from treatment or rupture may take weeks to months.

top

What research is being done?
The mission of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) is to seek fundamental knowledge about the brain and nervous system and to use that knowledge to reduce the burden of neurological disease. The NINDS is a component of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the leading federal supporter of biomedical research in the world. As part of its mission, the NINDS conducts research on cerebral aneurysms and supports studies through grants to medical institutions across the country.

The NINDS-funded International Study of Unruptured Aneurysm Study collected natural history data that guides medical decision-making based on size and location of asymptomatic aneurysms.

Genetics

Scientists have long known about the link between cerebral and aortic aneurysm (the aorta is the body's main artery). However, they still do not fully understand the relationship between the two types of aneurysm. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) provide molecular evidence for shared biological function and activities (pathophysiology) of these aneurysms. A specific site on chromosome 9p21 has been identified as increasing the risk for both cerebral and aortic aneurysms. This GWAS data, along with linkage data to other susceptible locations for genes or DNA sequences, indicate that individuals and families harboring one type of aneurysm may be at especially increased risk of the other.

Other scientists are studying additional chromosomes and chromosomal regions to identify aneurysm-related genes.

Diagnostic tools

Cerebral aneurysms located at the posterior communicating artery and in the arteries in the back part of the brain (called the vertebral and basilar arteries) are common and have higher risk of rupture than aneurysms at other locations. NINDS-funded scientists are working to identify the features associated with rupture and use these factors to build a scoring scale to guide and support clinical decisions.

The risk of having an aneurysm burst is difficult to determine and there can be serious complications from surgical treatments. Researchers are developing a new model to diagnose brain aneurysms based on the presence of molecules that can potentially tell whether there is a high chance of an aneurysm burst. This procedure can be done by using brain imaging without the need to open the skull. Not only would this new tool be less invasive, it would also allow for people to be treated before an aneurysm bursts.

Hormones and medication

Studies indicate aspirin lessens inflammation in cerebral aneurysms and reduces the risk of rupture. However, aspirin also inhibits the blood cells (platelets) that are important in stopping bleeding once a rupture occurs. Researchers are using mouse models to examine how inflammation impacts the formation and rupture of cerebral aneurysms, and the molecular mechanisms that contribute to the protective effect of aspirin.

Cerebral aneurysms and subarachnoid hemorrhage are more common in postmenopausal women than in men. Estrogen replacement therapy reduces the risk for subarachnoid hemorrhage in post-menopausal women. Researchers are investigating exactly how estrogen protects women against developing aneurysms. They hypothesize protection primarily occurs through inflammatory cells.

Treatments

Other research projects include studies of the effectiveness of microsurgical clipping and endovascular surgery to treat ruptured and unruptured aneurysms, the use of various types of coils and other materials to block the flow of blood into the aneurysm, and the influence of blood flow speed and pressure on the success or failure of treatment.